
## Preliminary research

I want to create a markup syntax tailored to contract drafting.

TODO: Formal Grammar → parser (auto-generated thru ANTLR) → AST (auto-generated thru ANTLR) → XML generation → validation

### Overview of different markup languages

Each markup language uses their own 'tags' to control the structure, presentation or description of data (which in most cases, would be text).

| Markup language                                    | Example tags                                                                             | Advantages                                                                          | Disadvantages                                                 |
| -------------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------- |
| [Markdown](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Markdown) | `# Heading text`, `## Heading text`, and `### Heading text`                              | Lightweight and easy to read                                                        | Too simple                                                    |
| [HTML](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HTML)         | `<h1>Heading text</h1>`, `<h2>Heading text</h2>` and `<h3>Heading text</h3>`             | Designed for the web browser                                                        | Not semantically appropriate for contracts                    |
| [LaTeX](https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/LaTeX)   | `\section{Heading text}`, `\subsection{Heading text}` and `\subsubsection{Heading text}` | Purpose-built for scientific papers                                                 | Typesetting specific to scientific articles and not contracts |
| [XML](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/XML)           | `<heading level="1">`, `<heading level="2">`                                             | Used for storing and transmitting data; extensible (i.e. design your own structure) | Too complex for a lawyer to code from scratch                 |


[This video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P-7hwjocEpM&ab_channel=WritetheDocs) discusses the history of markup languages from the perspective of writing documentation, providing examples of tags they've used and their use cases.

[Scribe](https://www.columbia.edu/cu/computinghistory/scribe.pdf) is also another markup language which heavily influenced those languages above. I take lots of inspiration from it too.

### Types of markup

There are three main general categories of electronic markup, articulated in Coombs, Renear, and DeRose (1987), (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Markup_language#cite_note-6) and [Bray](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tim_Bray "Tim Bray") (2003) (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Markup_language#cite_note-7). 
#### Presentational markup
The kind of markup used by traditional [word-processing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Word_processor_(electronic_device) "Word processor (electronic device)") systems: [binary codes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Binary_code "Binary code") embedded within document text that produce the [WYSIWYG](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WYSIWYG "WYSIWYG") ("**what you see is what you get**") effect. Such markup is usually hidden from human users, even authors and editors. Properly speaking, such systems use procedural and/or descriptive markup underneath but convert it to "present" to the user as geometric arrangements of type.

This is what Microsoft Word is.
#### Procedural markup
Markup is embedded in text which provides [instructions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opcode "Opcode") for [programs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Programming_language "Programming language") to process the text. Well-known examples include [troff](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Troff "Troff"), [TeX](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/TeX "TeX"), and [Markdown](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Markdown "Markdown"). It is assumed that software processes the text sequentially from beginning to end, following the instructions as encountered. Such text is often edited with the markup visible and directly manipulated by the author. Popular procedural markup systems usually include [programming constructs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Process_(computing) "Process (computing)"), especially [macros](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Macro_(computer_science) "Macro (computer science)"), allowing complex sets of instructions to be invoked by a simple name (and perhaps a few parameters). This is much faster, less error-prone, and more maintenance-friendly than re-stating the same or similar instructions in many places.
#### Descriptive markup
Markup is specifically used to label parts of the document for what they are, rather than how they should be processed. Well-known systems that provide many such labels include [LaTeX](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/LaTeX "LaTeX"), [HTML](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HTML "HTML"), and [XML](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/XML "XML"). The objective is to [decouple the structure](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Separation_of_content_and_presentation "Separation of content and presentation") of the document from any particular treatment or rendition of it. Such markup is often described as "[semantic](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Semantic_HTML "Semantic HTML")". An example of a descriptive markup would be HTML's `<cite>` tag, which is used to label a citation. Descriptive markup — sometimes called _logical markup_ or _conceptual markup_ — encourages authors to write in a way that describes the material conceptually, rather than visually.[[8]](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Markup_language#cite_note-8)

**I propose to use a combination of procedural (taking inspiration from Markdown) and descriptive markup (taking inspiration from LaTeX).**

### Custom XML based markup language

In trying to find resources on how to create markup languages, I came across [this publication](https://vdoc.pub/documents/create-your-own-markup-language-3nr1da8k3d8g) explaining how XML is used in practice:

>Before you get too far into this tutorial, I have to make a little confession. When you create an XML document, you aren't really using XML to code the document. Instead, you are using a markup language that was created in XML. In other words, XML is used to create markup languages that are then used to create XML documents. The term "XML document" is even a little misleading because the type of the document is really determined by the specific markup language used. So, as an example, if I were to create my very own markup language called MML (Michael's Markup Language), then the documents I create would be considered MML documents, and I would use MML to code those documents. Generally speaking, the documents are still XML documents because MML is an XML-based markup language, but you would refer to the documents as MML documents. The point of this discussion is not to split hairs regarding the terminology used to describe XML documents. It is intended to help clarify the point that XML is a technology that enables the creation of custom markup languages. If you're coming from the world of HTML, you probably think in terms of there being only one markup languageHTML. In the XML world, there are thousands of different markup languages, with each of them applicable to a different type of data. As an XML developer, you have the option of using an existing markup language that someone else created using XML, or you can create your own. An XML-based markup language can be as formal as XHTML, the version of HTML that adheres to the rules of XML, or as informal as my simple Tall Tales trivia language. When you create your own markup language, you are basically establishing which elements (tags) and attributes are used to create documents in that language. Not only is it important to fully describe the different elements and attributes, but you must also describe how they relate to one another. For example, if you are creating a markup language to keep track of sports information so that you can chart your local softball league, you might use tags such as `<schedule>, <game>, <team>, <player>`, and so on. Examples of attributes for the player element might includename, hits, rbis, and so on.

The author provides the steps to create a custom markup langauge:
1. define the XML schema (i.e. a data model)
2. 

### Closest contract-specific markup language I could find

Most markup languages for contractual drafting focus on creating Smart Legal Contracts (i.e. self-executing contracts). For a lawyer, this is unnecessary 99.99% of the time and adds unnecessary complexity to programmatic contractual drafting. 

The closest markup syntax I have found to what I want to do is within the Accord project, named [CiceroMark](https://docs.accordproject.org/docs/markup-ciceromark.html) and [TemplateMark](https://docs.accordproject.org/docs/markup-templatemark.html). 

CiceroMark allows for the parsing of clauses, such as the below:

```
{{#clause payment}} 
Payment 
------- 
As consideration in full for the rights granted herein, Licensee shall pay Licensor a one-time fee in the amount of "one hundred US Dollars" (100.0 USD) upon execution of this Agreement, payable as follows: "bank transfer". 
{{/clause}} 
```

TemplateMark allows for defining variables, such as defined terms:

`Upon the signing of this Agreement, {{buyer}} shall pay {{amount}} to {{seller}}.`

However, that is the extent of what you can do with that markup (other functionality is not necessarily useful for a non-smart contract).

### Goals

To develop a markup syntax, I need to follow these steps:
1. Design the syntax
2. Define a grammar
3. Develop a parser
	1. Lexer: break input into tokens
	2. Parse tree: tree-like structure that represents nested elements and relationships
4. Develop a renderer

Note: I do not want to create a Domain Specific Language (**DSL**). A DSL is an expressive, compact way to describe operations, configurations, or behaviors in that domain (for example, SQL for databases, Regular Expressions for pattern matching, or Terraform for infrastructure as code). A markup syntax, rather, is used to describe or annotate the structure and presentation of content. It focuses on organising and representing data or documents. Developing a DSL to simply draft contracts would be overkill as logic, conditionals, loops and expressions are not necessary when drafting contracts.

***
## Design of the syntax

### Rules

The heirarchy of the document is as follows
1. the document is either free text or 'blocks'
2. blocks are defined by "@begin{block name}" and "@end{block name}"
3. blocks set the styling of everything within it - the block name acts as the 'class' to target when applying styling
4. after the parser encounters a block, it will read everything in that block in the following way:
	1. # specifies a new clause
		1. if the styling configuration defines a # clause as one that only assigns a heading, a line break after the new specified clause (e.g. specified by # clause-name) will keep the following text as part of that clause heirarchy, but apply different styling to reflect the body of the clause (rather than the title)
		2. if the styling configuration defines a # clause as one that does not assign a heading, but rather begins the content of the clause immediately, then styling will apply to suit the body of the clause
	2. ## specifies a new subclause
		1. same rules apply as normal clauses, but is a level lower in the heirarchy
	3. ### specifies a new sub-subclause
	4. ... and so on
5. After clauses are parsed in a block, the parser will then look for:
	1. other commands
		1. @define will add new variables to create 'defined terms' which can be referenced throughout the document
		2. @i{text} will italicise, @b{text} will enbolden, etc. (see Scribe for more)
	2. references
		1. defined terms can be referenced as {{defined term}}
		2. cross references can be referenced as {{clause id}}
			1. the clause id will be auto generated based off the title of the clause (e.g. for a clause defined as # No guarantee of work or exclusivity, 'noGuaranteeOfWorkOrExclusivity')
			2. where there is no title, the clause id will auto generate as its parent clause with its corresponding position (e.g. for the first subclause of # No guarantee of work or exclusivity, 'noGuaranteeOfWorkOrExclusivity(1)' )

Note that commands preceded with @ may have attributes added by adding more parameters (e.g. @define{"Contract Authority", hide} to define a variable but hide it from appearing in the document)

In summary:
1. Documents are constructed by blocks specified by the @begin{block-name} and @end{block-name} commands (there may be free text inserted outside of blocks but the author will try and minimise this use)
2. Within blocks, text is separated into levels specified by the number hashes used
3. Within these 'leveled' texts, further commands can be used to add:
	1. formatting (via @i, @b, and so on); 
	2. variables (via @define); and
	3. references (via {{reference name}}).

### Current draft

Assume you wish to draft the following clauses (taken from the NSW Government's [MICTA/ICTA contracting framework](https://www.info.buy.nsw.gov.au/resources/micta-icta)):

**1.1                No guarantee of work or exclusivity**
The Contract Authority is not, by executing this MICTA:
(a)                  bound to issue any Order Proposal to the Supplier;
(b)                  bound to engage the Supplier to supply any goods, services and/or other activities or to enter into any Contract; or
(c)                   restricted in any way from engaging any other person to supply any goods, services and/or other activities:
(i)                    of any type, including goods, services and/or other activities that are the same as or similar to any Supplier's Activities or ICT Activities; or
(ii)                   at any location where, or in respect of any project that, the Supplier may be required to supply goods, services and/or other activities.

**1.2                No representation**
Clause 1.3 applies even though the Contract Authority may have provided the Supplier with a forecast or estimate of the goods, services, ICT Activities and/or other activities that the Contract Authority or any Eligible Customer may require at any time. The Supplier acknowledges that any forecasts or estimates do not constitute a representation of the goods, services and/or other activities the Contract Authority or any Eligible Customer may require in any period.

### Example markup syntax

(assuming the definitions reside in their own clause at the end of the contract)

```
@begin{GeneralConditions}

# No guarantee of work or exclusivity

The {{Contract Authority}} is not, by executing this {{MICTA}}:

## bound to issue any {{Order Proposal}} to the {{Supplier}};

## bound to engage the {{Supplier}} to supply any goods, services and/or other activities or to enter into any {{Contract}}; or

## restricted in any way from engaging any other person to supply any goods, services and/or other activities:
        
### of any type, including goods, services and/or other activities that are the same as or similar to any {{Supplier's Activities}} or {{ICT               Activities}}; or

### at any location where, or in respect of any project that, the {{Supplier}} may be required to supply goods, services and/or other activities.

# No representation

Clause {{noGuaranteeOfWorkOrExclusivity}} applies even though the {{Contract Authority}} may have provided the {{Supplier}} with a forecast or estimate of the goods, services, {{ICT Activities}} and/or other activities that the {{Contract Authority}} or any {{Eligible Customer}} may require at any time. The {{Supplier}} acknowledges that any forecasts or estimates do not constitute a representation of the goods, services and/or other activities the {{Contract Authority}} or any {{Eligible Customer}} may require in any period.

# Definitions and interpretation

## Definitions

In this MICTA capitalised terms have the same meaning as in the ICTA (unless they are assigned a different meaning below) and the following terms have the meaning assigned to them below:

@define{"Contract Authority"} means the relevant authority or agency executing this agreement.} 

@define{"MICTA"} means the master ICT agreement under which this agreement operates.

@define{"Supplier"} means the entity providing goods, services and/or other activities under this agreement.

@define{"Order Proposal"} means a document proposing specific goods, services and/or other activities for approval and execution under this {{MICTA}}.

@define{"Contract"} means any contract formed under or related to this arrangement, including those executed through an {{Order Proposal}}.

@define{"Supplier's Activities"} means the activities the {{Supplier}} undertakes under this agreement, including but not limited to the provision of goods or services.

@define{"ICT Activities"} means any information, communications, and technology-related activities undertaken under this agreement.

@define{"Eligible Customer"} means any customer eligible to place orders under this agreement in accordance with its terms.

@end{GeneralConditions}

```

### Example parsed markup syntax as JSON

The markup syntax would then be parsed as the following JSON:

```
{
    "metadata": {
      "title": "Sample Master Contract",
      "version": "1.0",
      "createdAt": "2024-12-31T10:00:00Z",
      "lastModified": "2024-12-31T11:15:00Z",
      "author": "Jane Lawyer"
    },
    "definitions": [
      {
        "termName": "Contract Authority",
        "definition": "means the entity that executes this agreement...",
        "references": []
      },
      {
        "termName": "Supplier",
        "definition": "means the party providing goods or services...",
        "references": ["Eligible Customer"]
      }
    ],
    "clauses": [
      {
        "id": "noGuaranteeOfWork",
        "title": "No Guarantee of Work or Exclusivity",
        "content": "The {{Contract Authority}} is not, by executing this {{MICTA}}: ...",
        "references": ["Contract Authority", "MICTA"],
        "subclauses": [
          {
            "id": "",
            "title": "",
            "content": "bound to issue any {{Order Proposal}}...",
            "references": ["Order Proposal"],
            "subclauses": []
          },
          {
            "id": "",
            "title": "",
            "content": "bound to engage the {{Supplier}} to supply any goods...",
            "references": ["Supplier"],
            "subclauses": []
          }
        ]
      },
      {
        "id": "noRepresentation",
        "title": "No Representation",
        "content": "Clause {{noGuaranteeOfWork}} applies even though...",
        "references": ["noGuaranteeOfWork"],
        "subclauses": []
      }
    ]
  }
```


## Formal Grammar

JNAO note: I am still debating whether to go through the trouble of defining a formal grammar (e.g. Extended Backus–Naur Form (EBNF)) and parsing a ASL tree, or whether I can just develop an extension to markdown.

